Objective:- Assignments will help trainees to understand the basics of unix command and how to explore and use it.

DO NOT copy paste commands from internet, you can take help of the Unix in-built command manual.

Be Honest to yourself!

Important command and option to learn unix commands:-
man Command
Example:-
man ls

--help Option
Example:-
ls --help

NOTE:- Always use "man" command before using any unix commands and read about it and its options and how to use it.

Assignments:-

List the contents of a directory and their attributes
ls

Long list the content with file, directory ownership, permissions,sizes, etc…
ls -l

Display the size of the file in human readable format
ls -lh

Show all files and folders including hidden one
ls -a

list directories recursively
ls -R

Sort the files by size with largest at the top
ls -lS

Sort the files by last time modified displaying the newest first.
ls -lt

Diplay the location of a program/command, where it is installed.
which

Which command is used to switch directory from one to another
cd

List all the environment variables set for the current shell environment
env

Did you notice something in the output of "env" command?
List of all environment variables and its values

Which command is used to print the text or any variables value in the Console/Terminal?
echo with $ symbol followed by variable name for variables

Print the value of the env variable "PATH" on the console
echo $PATH

Is linux a case-sensitive operating system?
Yes

Is, "Ls" same as "ls"?
No

Display your currently logged in user
whoami

how do you change the currrently logged in user to another user?
su - username

Which command is used to leave a shell environment that you are currently logged in to?
exit

How do you reboot the system?
reboot

How do you shutdown the system?
poweroff

Display all the major running processes in the system
ps -ef

Understand the output of command used in above question of displaying processes, explain the meaning of each column and what data it displays?
UID - Username of the user who started the process
PID - Process ID which is running
PPID - Parent Process ID
TTY - Name of terminal
STIME - Process start time
COMMAND - Command ran for this process

Display the name of the system kernel
uname -s

display the kernel release number
uname -r

display teh machine type of the current kernel
uname -m

Display the name of the operating system that the kernel is running on
uname -o

Display all info that uname command can show.
uname -a

Display the name of directory that you are currently pointing to
pwd

change the current directory to another directory that you have in your system.
cd

Go up one directory
cd ..

Return to last directory
cd -

change the current directory to home(logged in user's) directory
cd ~

How to check all the command used from the prompt (Command History)
history

In which file the history of commands are stored in?
~/.bash_history

How many lines of history does the system keep and from where you can change it?
500, can be changed by setting HISTSIZE in ~/.bashrc

How can you modify bash's history behaviour

Display all the commands entered so far, now, try to run a particular command from the history list without typing that command.
history
Note the command number and use it with bang symbol (!). Example !89

NOTE:- TAB key is your friend when it comes to command completion and having long file and directory names autocompleted at the bash prompt for you. JUST BE LAZY AND USE TAB KEY FOR AUTO COMPLETION ;-)

What are the different types of shell and where are they used and how do we use them?
Bourne Shell(sh), Bourne Again Shell (bash)
sh - #!/bin/sh
bash - #!/bin/bash

What is the difference between login shell and non-login shell?
Login shell is the first shell which is executed when successful login. Non login is the shell which is started by login shell.

How do we start login shell and non-login shell?
Non login shell is started by opening any terminal in desktop environment. Login shell is started automatically during boot and also can be started by entering Ctrl+Alt+F[1-7] keys.

What happens when you start a login shell (which files are read and used and Why)?
Login shell reads the files that contain environment variables like /etc/profile and then it executes the bashrc file.

What happens when you start a non-login shell (Which files are read and used and Why)?
Non login shell directly executes the bashrc file first.

What are Shell Configuration Files, why do we need it?
Shell configuration files are those which are required to set environment variables such as PATH, HOSTNAME etc.
/etc/profile and /etc/bashrc are the two system wide configuration files.

Explain the Order of file usage from the system/user's home directory when user logs in to the System.

What are Shell Variables, list major shell variables and what do they represent?
They are the environment variables which are set when user is logged in.
$PATH - List of directories to search for commands
$HOME - Path name of the user's home directory
$USER - Contains logged in user's name
$SHELL - Path name of the login shell

How we see all our env variables?
printenv

How we see all env variables in alphabical order?
printenv | sort

What Format does the env var and its values are stored?
By the order of their entry

How do you create your own varible?
export NAME=VALUE

How do you start a new bash shell?
bash command

Difference between Local/Shell variables to Global Variable

Making a variable accessible from other the shell in the system.

Show the real life use case of exporting a variable

Convert the above script file into a command, The file should run with "myappp" instead of "myapp.sh"

What is Globbing? Explain in depth with examples?

List all entries with extension ".sh"
ls *.sh

List all entries with numbers in it.
ls *[0-9]*

List all entries that starts with a character and ends with a number
ls [!0-9]*[0-9]

List all entries that name length more than 5 characters
ls -d !@(?|??|???|????|?????)

What is Quoting? and Why do we need it?

Write few(minimum 3) unique examples that shows, how a particular problem is solved using Quoting.

How do you find a particular files/directories based on a particular search criteria?
HINT:- look for commands -> locate, find and whereis

Write major difference between locate, find and whereis?
locate - searches for file in linux system, using database to index
find - searching with particular criteria
whereis - returns location of executables, man pages and program sources

How Globbing is different from locate, find and whereis?

Explain the Linux File System.

Explain absolute and Relative Paths
Absolute paths are the path to file or folder from the root.
Relative paths are the path to file or folder from the current directory.

What are the different ways of creating a File in linux System? Write an example of each and the difference between them.
touch filename
nano filename and then save after editing
vi filename

In how many ways we can delete the files from linux system? write an example of each and teh difference between them.
rm filename

Archiving files using linux command, write a command to archive set of files from linux commands.
tar -cvf compressed.tar files/

Extract the archived files from the above step.
tar -xvf compressed.tar